
1)Presentation
Hello, everyone!
My name is Diego Lloveras, I am a PhD fellow of CONICET, I'm doing my research in the Solar Physics Group at the Institute of Astronomy and Space physics, in Buenos Aires, Argentina. 

In my talk today I am going to comment on one three-dimensional tomographic reconstruction and MHD modeling of two specific solar rotations. We are carrying out this line of research with  Vasquez and Nuevo (the three of us in Buenos Aires in charge of tomography), Sachdeva,  manchester, van der holst, and frazin (at the University of Michigan mainly in charge of the MHD model),  Lamy and Wojak  (in France in charge of providing calibrated Lasco C2 images).

We are currently coming out of a minimum of solar activity. During a minimum period, the sun is in its most relaxed and simple state, and it offers us a very good opportunity to study and understand the sun-earth relationship on a large scale. In this context, the collaboration campaign "Whole Heliosphere and Planetary Interactions" (WHPI) is carried out. By focusing on particular solar rotations near solar minimum, the campaign is a coordinated observational and modeling effort to characterize three-dimensional solar-heliospheric systems during solar minimum. 

Within this framework, we use a tomographic reconstruction and MHD modeling to determine properties of the fast and slow solar wind in the low corona in two specific Carrington rotations, which are CR2223 and the rotation centered in the total solar eclipse of second July 2019, which took place in Argentina.

*2)Sun-Earth relation
The solar corona is the place where the solar wind is heated and accelerated, there are impulsive events as solar flares and CMEs, and also the abundances freeze out. We are in a space-age, therefore the observation and modeling of the solar Corona are of great relevance for the understanding and therefore the prediction of space weather.


3) Solar Corona
The corona is the outermost part of the solar atmosphere. It is composed of plasma and extends from the chromosphere to the interplanetary medium. This plasma is governed by the solar magnetic field that is generated by the dynamo effect and the convective movements inside the sun.

As we move away from the chromosphere towards the interplanetary medium, we pass through the transition region which is an irregular and thin region where the plasma temperature increases by two orders of magnitude and the density decreases by two orders. In this way, in the corona we find temperatures and densities of these magnitudes.

The corona is optically thin and emits efficiently in EUV and WL.
We can obtain information on these emissions through images, which are two-dimensional projections of three-dimensional emission structures. Advancement in physical models (such as MHD) are needing three-dimensional information of fundamental parameters of the corona, such as magnetic field, density, and temperature. And here is where tomography plays a role in using images to obtain three-dimensional information.
I will briefly explain the tomography in the next slides, but first a little bit of context

4) Ulysses
In a minimum of activity, the solar magnetic field lines look like a dipole.  In black, the closed lines that make up the streamer and starting from the poles we find open lines. Here different color indicates different polarities. If we get far enough from the sun we will only find open lines.

The image on the left is part of an image from a paper of  McComas that shows, it has on the background, an overlap of 3 images, where more intensity indicates greater density. In-situ measurements of Ulysses' first orbit were added to this image, including terminal solar wind speed and density (in green color).

Plasma in open lines is accelerated and flows through them until reaching terminal velocities. The plasma associated with lines with more polar basal latitudes reaches speeds of the order of 750 km / s. It is called the fast solar wind and is characterized by its uniform regime, high speed, and low density.

As we approach the equatorial plane, we find a slow solar wind that is characterized by a non-uniform regime of low speed and high density, which is associated with lines with basal latitudes closer to the edges of the streamer.

The mechanisms that generate the slow solar wind are an open topic, for example in this paper by Suess a few possibilities were proposed. One associated with hydrodynamic instabilities, plasma release at the top of the streamer, and continuous flows in the area between the streamer and the open lines.

What we are going to do is relate, for each of these open lines, the terminal velocity given by an MHD model with the basal density given by the tomographic technique.


5)Tomografia solar rotacional (tecnica DEMT)

The Solar rotational tomography takes a time series of images of a rotation and allows us to determine 3D thermodynamic properties in the corona.

Iron ions emit efficiently in the EUV range between 1-1.3Rs. A time series of images taken by instruments such as EIT, EUVI, and AIA can be used by the technique to determine 3D properties of electronic density and temperature. You can find the details of the technique in these two papers.

Thompson scattering of photospheric visible light can also be used by this technique. In this work, we use a time series of images taken by Lasco C2 to obtain three-dimensional density between 2.5 and 8Rs. More details in this paper of Altshuler and Perry.

6)Temp 
For EUV tomography we are using images taken by AIA on board SDO, it has 4 bands with different thermal sensitivity ranging from half a million to 4 million degrees.

The EUV tomography is mainly based on two steps:
First, taking as data the intensity in each pixel of a time series of images and knowing the geometry of the lines of sight that corresponds to each pixel, the emissivity of each band in the 3D grid is calculated.

In a second step, using the emissivity of all the bands and the thermal response of the instrument, a Gaussian function is proposed as a thermal distribution and this function is minimized in each cell of the 3D grid (this function is called Local Differential Emission Measure). Taking the moments of this function, values of density and temperature can be obtained.

I leave you as reference this paper of Nuevo where different parameters for this function were explored.


7) Tomographic Results
One way to visualize the tomographic results is by means of carrington maps, which are latitude vs. longitude maps (in this case electron density). At the top, the base of the tomographic grid and below an intermediate height. Each column represent one rotation.

The high density region correspond to the streamer and low densities correspond to the coronal holes. The black line marks the separation between the closed and open magnetic lines and is obtained using the MHD model. Notice the good agreement between the tomography result and the MHD model at every height. 

8) AWSOM
We are using the Alfven Wave Solar Model (AWSoM). It is a 3D MHD model that spans from the chromosphere to 1 AU. It was developed by the Department of Climate and Space Science at the University of Michigan.

The corona heating is addressed by including the non-linear interaction of outward and counterpropagating (reflected) Alfvén waves that dissipate and transfer energy into smaller scales.

Synoptic magnetograms, which are the radial magnetic field at the photospheric level, are used as the only data for modeling. 

For the model to evolve, it needs to be validated with observations. In 2019 we collaborated on this Sachdeva paper in a global validation framework of the AWSoM model.

And this year we published a thermodynamic validation in the lower corona of the AWSoM model using tomography, differentiating magnetic structures, and focusing on the closed region.

Nowadays different magnetograms are available for the community. Magnetograms, as provided by GONG or HMI, have difficulties in measuring the radial component of the field in the polar zones, which can lead to unreal or unphysical solutions in the AWSoM model. 
In this work we are using ADAPT-GONG maps, which use the GONG map with a photospheric magnetic flux transport model. For example, this map which shows a very clear dipole component.

9) Validating with VL-tom
We use the density solutions obtained with VL-tomography to validate the AWSom solutions.
For a rotation here I show you in the top map the density given by the MHD model at 6 Rs and in the map below the density given by tomography. In both maps we can see the same orders of magnitude and similar morphologies.

To those interested in adapt-gong magnetograms I leave these two papers for reference.

10)Vr
Now I want to show you the solar wind modeled by AWSoM.
These are latitude-longitude maps of the radial component of wind speed, at two heights. Above, at the lowest height offered by the model, and below at 6 solar radii.
In the top maps the white line separates open field lines in the coronal holes from the closed lines in the streamer.

As we go towards higher heights, the open region expands and at 6Rs everything corresponds to open lines.
We find higher speeds in more polar latitudes and the velocity decrease towards the equator reaching their minimum value in the latitudes corresponding to the current sheet here marked as a white line.

Although at 6 solar radii the terminal velocity is not reached, the differentiation between both components is already clearly observed

11) Lat Profile
Here I am showing you the average latitudinal profile of basal density given by tomography (top row) and velocity given by AWSoM model al 6Rs (bottom row), for each rotation.
The black lines represent the average position of the boundary between open and closed lines.

Open lines that come out of one hemisphere do not cross the other. Therefore there must be a direct relationship between the branches of each hemisphere.

The way to relate them is using a magnetic extrapolation that crosses the 3D grid with both results, in this way we can know for each open line the tomographic density and its corresponding MHD speed.

12) scatter
A scatter plot of both magnitudes for each line look like this, for both rotation. 

On the vertical axis we have the tomographic density at the lowest heigh possible and on the horizontal axis the radial wind speed given by AWSom. To separate both hemispheres we have multiplied the velocity by the sign of the magnetic field. So, in the positive side we have the northern hemisphere and on the negative side we have the south. The color bar indicates the absolute value of latitude at Rs 6, and each dot here represent a line.

So we have slow solar wind in the most equatorial zone (HCS) with relatively high basal densities and as we move away towards higher latitudes, the density decreases and the speed increases, reaching the highest speeds in the most polar zone. The slow SW is the one with the highest expansion factor and the fast SW the lowest expansion factor.

The black line is a minimum squares fit simply to show this trend more clearly.

We determined for the first time tomographically and quantitatively the basal properties of both components of the solar wind.

13) Final comments


To summarize




